[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery,
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Our topic today
is how to know God
without the necessity of belief.
I've been talking with
physicist Russell Targ, author
of five books, each of which has
the word "mind" in the title,
"Mind Reach," "The Heart of
the Mind," "Miracles of Mind,"
"The Mind Race," and others.
Welcome, Russell.
>> Hello.
I'm happy to be with you.
>> In the first part of
this two-part series,
we talked about the principle
of nonlocality in science,
a fundamental principle
which I think is a key
because we're in an era now
where science and spirituality
are finding common ground.
For centuries, it
seemed as if science
struggled to distinguish
itself from the dogma
of religious traditions.
Now, things seem to be
moving back the other way.
>> I think a lot of progress is
made because what we understand
is the experience of God
as a testable hypothesis.
You don't have to give up
your discerning mind in order
to participate in the experience
of love, the experience of God,
that's available.
For example, in the Buddhist
tradition, or many meditative
traditions, they say if
you will quiet your mind
and surrender to the
experience of God
or surrender to the
experience of love,
then you are likely to have
a certain kind of loving
experience.
You'll reside in this loving
syrup that we've talked about.
And the teaching then is, after
you have done this practice,
come back, write
me a lab report,
and let me know what
you experienced--
does not require you to believe
in any panoply of superstition,
or deities, or anything else.
It's that you have this unit of
experience, this one with God
experience that's
available without having
to give up your
life as a scientist
or a thoughtful person.
>> Now, I think we ought
to point out that what
we're talking about here is very
different from the sophomore
philosophy class in which
we explore, does God exist?
Because from that
perspective, God
is not a testable hypothesis.
And, in fact, the Buddhists
would say the same, too.
They would say God is--
there is no selfness to God.
>> The question of the existence
of God never gets anywhere.
The contribution of
the logical positivists
in the early 20th century,
Alfred Ayer and Ludwig
Wittgenstein, probably the
most capable, intelligent
philosophers that
there have ever been,
said that nothing sensible
can say about God because God
doesn't have any properties.
And, in fact, they felt
that any discussion of God
was nonsense because there
was no sense data available.
In their later years,
both Wittgenstein and Ayer
changed their minds somewhat.
All their lives, they
were believers in data,
but in the latter part
of Wittgenstein's life,
for example, in a book--
after the "Tractatus,"
he wrote a book,
"On Certainty"--
what do we really know?
And what he concluded is that
the experience of the mystics
actually could be
considered data.
If all the mystics
throughout time
keep reporting the
same experience,
maybe we should believe
that they are actually
having the experience
that they describe.
In fact, Wittgenstein
said that, if we
are going to find meaning in
our life, in space and time,
that meaning will come
outside of space and time.
So in the end, he decided
that these mystics
may be onto something.
>> William James, I
think, had a similar idea.
James was the founder
of American psychology,
and he developed a concept
he called radical empiricism,
in which he said, our
own inner experience
is the most direct form of
reality that we can know.
It's primary, whereas sensory
experience is secondary.
>> I would agree with that.
We don't want to talk
endlessly about philosophers,
but CS Peirce, the pragmatist,
English pragmatist,
who certainly was
nobody's fool, came
with a paper, "The
Neglected Proof
for the Existence of God."
And this neglected proof was the
fact that all of these mystics,
from Buddha, to Patanjali, to
Jesus, Blake, Emerson, Ramana
Maharshi, all of these
people who have inspired us
throughout millennia,
have reported
very similar experiences.
And what Peirce
pointed out is that you
don't have to believe anything.
What these mystics are saying,
if you quiet your mind,
this particular kind of
experience is available.
And it's the experience
that throughout all
of mystic traditions, say,
is a unit of experience,
an in-love, one
with God experience,
and is testable and
independent of belief.
>> It seems to be independent
of any Sunday school version
of God, or the
deity, or the Bible.
>> It gets past the whole
idea of, does God exist?
You don't have to argue
about God existing.
Jesus has told us that
God provides a peace that
passes understanding,
and that peace
is available as an experience
to anyone who can control
their own mental chatter.
>> There's a sense in which God
transcends existence, in that,
I gather from what
you're saying,
God is the ground
of all existence.
>> In the-- I would
agree with that.
In the perennial philosophy--
the perennial philosophy
was brought to us throughout
the-- again, throughout all
the mystical
spiritual traditions,
and was codified by
Aldous Huxley in his book
"The Perennial Philosophy."
What is common to
any spiritual belief?
And he really had
four elements that
have become very current with
the advances in modern physics.
His first element of
the perennial philosophy
is that we live in
a world that is more
like a great thought
than a clockwork idea,
that the universe is a nonlocal,
interconnected universe where
all parts are connected
to one another.
The second part of
perennial philosophy
is the good news is that our
consciousness is also nonlocal,
so that within
our consciousness,
we are able to experience
and participate
in this expanded universe,
that we are not bodies.
We are awareness.
We're a center of
awareness located
in this body for this time,
and this awareness is nonlocal.
It's able to experience
distant points in space, time,
because we live in a
nonlocal space and time.
The third point comes from
our center of awareness
rather than our
materiality, because we
know that bodies come and go.
But the data from
contemporary science--
Ian Stevenson, for
example, a physician
at the University
of Virginia, shows
that there is an aspect
of our personality
that survives bodily death.
And you're familiar
with this work,
where children are born having
memories of a previous life.
>> You're talking
about reincarnation.
>> That's right.
There is an aspect
that survives--
often not much, so
I wouldn't put off
any plans you want to
accomplish and say,
I'll do them next lifetime.
I think that's not prudent.
But it's evident that this
awareness that we have,
this nonlocal awareness,
some aspect of that survives.
And finally, the meaning of
life, the thing that drives us,
is what you were
asking about initially.
What drives us and
gives our lives
meaning is the opportunity
for this unit of experience,
the opportunity to have
a nonlocal experience,
a one with God
experience, an opportunity
to reside in this expanded
love that's available to us.
And then, what
people discover is
that the meaning of their
life comes with the desire
to share that experience.
>> Now, Russell, you speak
as one who has found a sense
of peace, a sense of
bliss, and a sense of God.
And I know it--
you didn't start
your career this way.
You weren't even
necessarily looking for this
when you began.
>> No.
I started as a physicist.
I was putting-- most
recently, I was putting lasers
on airplanes at
Lockheed Missiles
and Space Company in the
heart of the weapons factory.
And we were looking out into the
future, out into the distance,
to find wind shear so the
airplane wouldn't crash.
The very hardware-- this is
remote viewing with lasers.
>> You've been a physicist
and an engineer all your life.
>> That's right.
>> So something transformed
you along the way.
Partially, it was the data,
and, partially, I suppose,
it was your own personal quest
to make sense of that data.
>> Well, it was a gift of the
CIA that allowed me to spend
a decade in the dark learning
to do remote viewing,
helping other people get
in touch with the part
of themselves that's psychic.
And it's the discovery that this
nonlocal awareness is available
that led me to the--
led me to the pursuit
of getting quiet.
In Silicon Valley,
for example, we
find that people are
searching for happiness.
Everyone is looking to find some
kind of thing that will bring
them what they're looking for.
In Silicon Valley,
in general, it's
something on the material plane.
If I get a new house
or a new girlfriend
or a new car, that will all--
that will bring me happiness,
is the thought.
Of course, that never
works, as that--
as a scientist, I could say--
>> It's as if these things
are a substitute for a deeper
yearning that people have.
>> That's right.
As a scientist, I could say
that experiment has been done.
And what's found
is that happiness
that a person has in his
life ensues from his life
experience, and that
happiness is not
to be found on the
material plane.
>> Russell, we're
about to take a break--
>> Fine.
>> --here.
>> Could say happiness
is an inside job.
>> We'll be back in just a few
moments with physicist Russell
Targ.
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey
Mishlove, and my guest
is physicist Russell
Targ, author of "The Heart
of the Mind" and other books.
We're talking about
how you can know God
without the necessity of belief.
And, Russell, you've
pointed out, really,
that there's a methodology here,
the methodology of quieting
the mind, of achieving
a state of serenity,
of allowing one's self
to experience a kind
of ground of being of
the whole universe,
which you've
described as blissful.
>> And we ended up with my
saying the idea that happiness
is an inside job.
Viktor Frankl, who was
in a concentration camp,
was an inspired
writer who told us
that we give all the meaning
it has to what we experience.
And while in the concentration
camp, being starved and badly
treated by the Nazis,
he created a psychology
of optimism and spirituality.
He said, no matter what
they do to my physical body,
they can't take away
my spirituality,
my experience of God.
And what he pointed
out-- he was not a--
but he was Jewish, of
course, but he was not
an orthodox or
particularly believing Jew.
He had the experience of
God, the experience of love
in his life, and that experience
ensued throughout his life.
>> Mm-hmm.
My sense is that once
you have that experience,
you understand your deep
connection with the universe.
And for such a
person, at that point,
it doesn't matter whether you're
an atheist, or an agnostic,
or a religious
believer because you're
in touch with a reality that
transcends all theories.
>> Yeah, I think
that's certainly true.
I would say that
it's not sound to--
for anybody to be
an atheist today.
To say you're an atheist
is a misunderstanding.
Even the logical positivists
were not atheists.
They said, we don't know.
But to be an--
>> But the Buddhists
called them--
say that there is Anatta.
There is nothing.
There is no self.
It might not-- I think one could
argue that Buddhists are indeed
atheists.
>> Well, the Buddhists
are in love with the god--
one of the Buddhist's deity--
I think there are different
kinds of Buddhism, as you know.
The Buddhists are
in love with the god
of compassion, Avalokitesvara--
>> Oh, yes.
>> --the god who will come down
to you and be in your locus
and bring you compassion.
So to say that it's free of
deities is an overstatement.
That is, people can pray to
this favorite compassionate god,
even if you're a Buddhist.
>> But the Buddhists would
also say, I think, you know,
that they don't exist--
[LAUGHS] either that they're--
that there is no self.
There's, like, an energy.
>> Well, coming
back to reality--
>> [LAUGHS]
>> --what we observe is that
we have a center awareness,
is we are aware.
We're not physical bodies.
We're a center of awareness
residing in a physical body.
Thinking that your physical body
is a source of great suffering,
especially in America, where
all the advertising we see
is concerning physical
bodies and appearances
and the hopelessness of
looking like Barbie, which
is outside physical reality--
the idea that the shape
of your physical body
determines who you are,
whereas what we know
is that who you are is a
center of awareness temporarily
residing in this body.
>> Yeah.
Well, there are
many paradoxes here,
when we get into the
nature of the self,
the nature of the deity.
>> The expanded awareness we
were talking about is a clue
that there is more to us than
the skin and bones and the meat
and potatoes.
>> By which you're referring
to our discussion in part 1,
of extrasensory perception and
your decades of work in that
field.
>> We were talking
about remote viewing,
or the opportunity that we
have to look into the distance
or look into the future, is a
clue that there's more to us
than the physicality that
you see sitting in a chair.
And the Hindu teacher
Patanjali, who
was 300 years before
Christ, told his students
and wrote in his books
the "Sutras of Patanjali,"
which are still available--
>> The Yoga Sutras.
>> --that, as you
quiet your mind,
you will have these
interesting experiences.
You will be able to
look into the distance,
look into future
time, heal the sick,
diagnose illnesses as part
of expanding your awareness.
And he then went on
to say, now, don't
get attached to these things.
This is just more phenomena.
But these phenomena show
that you are progressing
on a spiritual path.
Now, the spiritual
path that you want
to be on leads to
transcendence, leads
to a unity-consciousness
experience.
Patanjali was a Hindu,
so he would probably
be happy saying that it was
a one with God experience.
More contemporary,
Jesus might say
that it's an in-love
experience, and Jesus taught us
that God is love.
Contemporary teachers
like Ramana Maharshi,
who talked about
self-inquiry, would
say that it's an opportunity
to experience who you are
and surrender your story,
as giving up your story
is an opportunity to participate
in this expanded awareness,
to give up the
drive for happiness
on the material plane, but
rather to find happiness
inside.
So all of these mystics are
leading in the same direction.
And what they all
have in common is
that they don't want
you to believe a thing.
They say, try this.
This experience is available.
And you could say that God
is a testable hypothesis
in the spirit of all the
mystics, where they agree.
>> So you're
suggesting to people,
who may not know what
you're talking about,
that they can take some
simple steps to, well,
discover for themselves.
>> Well, the simple
steps, of course,
involve first of all observing
that happiness is not going
to be found on the
material plane.
Now, that's a big
disappointment.
>> And you pointed out, even
meaning is not to be found
in the material plane.
>> That's right, because we give
the meaning for our experiences
from our own choice.
That is, what we
experience intrinsically
doesn't have any meaning
beyond what we give it.
But once we learn
to quiet our mind
and to reside in this peaceful
place with a quiet mind,
then we have an opportunity
for these experiences.
What we discover is
that love is available.
And in the interactions we
have with different people,
the interaction you
have from a person
is either an expression of
love or a call for love.
Even the disagreeable
person one is working for
or the tired person at
the counter is not--
doesn't hate you.
He's just calling for love.
He's having a desperate day.
And you can greet
him with the idea
that the nonlocal
awareness in you
recognizes the nonlocal
awareness in him,
and that you are, in fact,
one, that you're connected.
So the metaphysics
that we are all one
is today finding
a great coherence
with modern physics
that says that we
are, in fact,
nonlocal creatures,
profoundly interacting with one
another across space and time.
>> And you earlier referred
to the idea of intentionality,
as well as awareness, that when
we get in touch with what you
refer to as our nonlocal self,
we have the facility to express
a kind of joyful, exuberant,
loving, healing energy,
and as part of our experience.
>> The nonlocality is the most
important message I could leave
with you.
That is, in modern
physics, we now
know that we live in
a nonlocal universe.
It's not to say that
extrasensory perception is
explained by the fact that
distant photons are connected.
In the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
experiment,
we observe that these photons
traveling away from each other
are connected.
And what that
shows us is that we
live in a profoundly
interconnected world, quite
compatible with the various
kinds of psychic things we see.
The outflow of intention that
we see in spiritual healing
is another manifestation of
these nonlocal connections.
And more and more,
we see data published
in prestigious medical journals
that healers across the country
can pray for cardiac
patients or AIDS patients,
and in the experiments--
recently, my daughter,
Elizabeth Targ,
did experiments at California
Pacific Medical Center.
And with 60 very sick
men, the half, the 30 men,
who were the
recipients of prayers
had much better outcomes.
They had fewer
opportunistic illnesses,
fewer trips to the
hospital, fewer
days in the hospital, better
self-reports of how they feel.
And these were
double-blind studies,
that no one in the hospital,
including the patients,
knew who was
receiving the prayers.
But at the end, where
there was a review
of the charts, the people
for whom the distant prayers,
those distant people
were able to have
an effect on the
physical well-being
of the people in the hospital.
And this was published in the
"Western Medical Journal,"
and similar studies
with cardiac patients
have been published in "Annals
of Medicine" and "Southern
Medical Journal," involving many
hundreds of cardiac patients.
So it's absolutely
evident that the effects
of these distant people
are having an effect.
So the message is that, even
if you don't believe in prayer,
and somebody offers
to pray for you,
you should accept the prayers.
It seems to work, even if
you don't believe in it.
>> And your daughter,
Elizabeth Targ,
one of the country's leading
researchers in this area,
is scheduled to be a
guest on this program.
>> That should be a
very interesting show.
>> Indeed.
Well, Russell, we've covered
a lot of ground here.
We've talked about
remote viewing.
psychic healing.
And we've gone deeper into the
relationship between science
and spirituality and a
fundamental methodology
that you're proposing
any of our listeners
can use to prove to themselves
that the perennial message
of mystics and spiritual
teachers is correct.
>> It's available, and
it's readily available.
You don't have to
believe a thing.
If, when you pop your
eyes open in the morning,
if you can wake up in gratitude,
wake up saying thank you,
rather than waking up in our
customary fear, and anxiety,
and resentment,
and desperation--
if you can wake up in gratitude,
it can start your whole day
in a day of grace.
>> Russell Targ, thank you
so much for being with me.
This has been an enlightening
time, a joyful time,
and one that's been inspiring to
me and I'm sure to our viewers.
>> Thank you very much.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[THEME MUSIC]